Desktop e-book: Chapter 4 (#17302)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/modernize-desktop/windows-migration.md

---
title: Windows 10 migration
description: Deep dive in Windows 10 features such as packaging and XAML Islands.
ms.date: 09/16/2019
---

# Windows 10 migration

Consider the following situation: You have a working desktop application that
was developed in the Windows 7 days. It's using WPF technology available at that
time and working fine but it has an outdated UI and behaviors when you run it on
Windows 10. It is like when you watch a futuristic movie like Matrix and you see
Neo using the Nokia 8110 device. The film works great after 20 years but it
would rather benefit from a device modernization.

With the release of Windows 10, Microsoft introduced many innovations to support
scenarios like tablets and touch devices and to provide the best experience for

> users for a Microsoft operating system ever. You can sign in with your face using
> Windows Hello. You can use a pen to draw or handwrite text that is automatically
> recognized and digitalized. You can even run locally customized AI models built
> on the cloud using WinML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users for a Microsoft operating system ever. For example, you can:

- Sign in with your face using Windows Hello.
- Use a pen to draw or handwrite text that is automatically recognized and digitalized. 
- Run locally customized AI models built on the cloud using WinML.
```

> All these features are enabled for Windows developers throughout Windows Runtime (WinRT)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these features are enabled for Windows developers through Windows Runtime (WinRT)
```

libraries. You can take advantage of these features in your existing
desktop apps because the libraries are exposed to both the .NET Framework
and .NET Core as well. You can even modernize your UI with the use of XAML
Islands and improve the visuals and behavior of your apps according to the
times.

One important thing to note here is that you don't need to abandon .NET
Framework technology to follow this modernization path. You can safely stay on
there and have all the benefits of Windows 10 without the pressure to migrate to
.NET Core. So, you get both the power and the flexibility to choose your
modernization path.

## WinRT APIs

WinRT APIs are object-oriented, well-structured application
programming interfaces (APIs) that give Windows 10 developers access to

> everything the operating system has to offer. Through WinRT APIs you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
everything the operating system has to offer. Through WinRT APIs, you can
```

  reach millions of Windows 10 users.

* **Add UWP features**. You can add UWP features to your app's package at your
  own pace.

#### Prepare for packaging

Before proceeding to package your desktop application, there are some points you
have to address before starting the process. Your application must respect any
of the Microsoft Store rules and policies and run in the UWP application model.
For example, it has to run on the .NET Framework 4.6.2 or later and writes to
the `HKEY_CURRENT_USER` registry hive and the AppData folders will be virtualized
to a user-specific app-local location.

The design goal for packaging is to separate the application state from system
state while maintaining compatibility with other apps. Windows 10 accomplishes
this goal by placing the application inside a UWP
package. It detects and redirects some changes to the file system and registry
at run time to fulfill the promise of a trusted and clean install and uninstall
behavior of an application provided by packaging.

Packages that you create for your desktop application are desktop-only,
full-trust applications that aren't sandboxed, although there's lightweight

> virtualization applied to the app for writes to `HKCU` & `AppData`. This allows

Reviewer: Also, should you say what HKCU and AppData are?

```suggestion
virtualization applied to the app for writes to `HKCU` and `AppData`. This virtualization allows
```

them to interact with other apps the same way classic desktop applications do.

##### Installation

> App packages are installed under `C:\\Program Files\\WindowsApps\\package_name`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App packages are installed under *C:\\Program Files\\WindowsApps\\package_name*,
```

Reviewer: We also commonly refer to the program files directory as %ProgramFiles%, since users can choose a different default drive.

process.

For details about how a packaged application handles installation, file access,
registry, and uninstallation, see
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/msix/desktop/desktop-to-uwp-behind-the-scenes>.

You can get a complete list of things to check on
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/msix/desktop/desktop-to-uwp-prepare>.

## How to add WinRT APIs to your desktop project

In this section, you can find a walkthrough on how to integrate Toast
Notifications in an existing WPF application. Although it's simple from the
code perspective, it helps illustrate the whole process. Notifications are one
of the many available WinRT APIs available that you can use in .NET app. In this
case, the API requires a Package Identity. This process is more straightforward
if the APIs don't require Package Identity.

Let's take an existing WPF sample app that reads files and shows its contents on
the screen. The goal is to display a Toast Notification when the
application starts.

![Screenshot of the sample application running](media\windows-migration\sample-application.png)

First, you should check in the following link whether the Windows 10 API that
you'll use requires a Package Identity:

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/desktop-to-uwp-supported-api>

Reviewer: For these bare links, is it important that they show up in print? otherwise, I'd recommend adding the title too for SEO purposes and better readability

Windows 10 APIs, like live tiles and notifications on the action center. But
still, no new UI controls.

At Build 2018, Microsoft announced a way for developers to use the new Windows
10 XAML controls into their current Win32 apps, without fully migrating their
apps to UWP. It was branded as UWP XAML Islands.

### How it works

The Windows 10 1903 update introduces several XAML hosting APIs. Two of them are
`WindowsXamlManager` and `DesktopWindowXamlSource`.

The `WindowsXamlManager` class handles the UWP XAML Framework. Its
`InitializeForCurrentThread` method loads the UWP XAML Framework inside the current
thread of the Win32 app.

The `DesktopWindowXamlSource` is the instance of your XAML Island content. It has
the `Content` property, which you're responsible for instantiating and setting.
The `DesktopWindowXamlSource` renders and gets its input from an HWND. It needs to
know to which other HWND it will attach the XAML Island's one, and you're
responsible for sizing and positioning the parent's HWND.

WPF or Windows Forms developers don't usually deal with HWND inside their code,
so it may be hard to understand and handle HWND pointers and the underlying

> wiring stuff to communicate Win32 and UWP worlds.

Reviewer: can we replace stuff with something else? Sounds too informal

or Windows Forms that make easier to use XAML Islands. These wrappers manage the
HWNDs, the focus management, among other things. Windows Forms and WPF
developers should use these wrappers.

The Windows Community Toolkit offers two types of controls: Wrapped Controls and
Hosting Controls

##### Wrapped Controls

These wrapped controls wrap some UWP controls into Windows Forms or WPF
controls, hiding UWP concepts for those developers. These controls are:

* WebView and WebViewCompatible
* InkCanvas and InkToolbar
* MediaPlayerElement
* MapControl

Add the `Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.Controls` package to your project, include the
reference to the namespace, and start using them.

```xml
<Window
        ...
        xmlns:uwpControls="clr-namespace:Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.Controls;assembly=Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.Controls">
<Grid>
    <Grid.RowDefinitions>
        <RowDefinition Height="Auto"/>
        <RowDefinition Height="\*"/>
    </Grid.RowDefinitions>
    <uwpControls:InkToolbar TargetInkCanvas="{x:Reference Name=inkCanvas}"/>
    <uwpControls:InkCanvas Grid.Row="1" x:Name="inkCanvas" />
</Grid>
```

##### Hosting controls

> The power of XAML Islands extends to most inbox controls, third-party

Reviewer: There are still some of my previous comments that were marked as outdated but still valid. for example, here:

inbox controls? maybe first-party?

As you can see, WinUI 3 is the evolution of UWP XAML and it works naturally
within the UWP app model and all its requirements (MSIX packaged ID, sandbox,
CoreWindow, and so on. To use just WinUI 3 in a Win32 app model, the WinUI content
should be hosted by another UI Framework (Windows Forms, WPF, and so on) using **WinUI
XAML Islands**. This is the right path if you want to evolve your app and mix
technologies. However, if you want to replace your entire old UI for WinUI, your
app shouldn't load UI Frameworks for just hosting WinUI.

WinUI 3 will address this critical feedback adding **WinUI in desktop apps**.
This will allow that Win32 apps can use WinUI 3 as standalone UI Framework; no
need to load Windows Forms or WPF.

Within this aggregation, WinUI 3 will let developers easily mix and match the
right combination of:

* App model: UWP, Win32
* Platform: .NET Core or Native
* Language: .NET (C\#, Visual Basic), standard C++
* Packaging: MSIX, AppX for the Microsoft Store, unpackaged
* Interop: use WinUI 3 to extend existing WPF, WinForms, and MFC apps using WinUI
  XAML Islands.

If you want to know more details, Microsoft is sharing this roadmap in

> <https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml/blob/master/docs/roadmap.md>.

Reviewer: This doesn't have the previous and next buttons

systems that do not require a package identity. If you want to use these WinRT
APIs in your desktop application, you need to provide them a package identity.

One way to proceed is to build an additional packaging project. Inside the
packaging project, you point to the original source code project and specify the
Identity information you want to provide. If you install the package and run the installed app, it will automatically get an identify enabling your code to call
all WinRT APIs requiring Identity.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<Package xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/appx/manifest/foundation/windows10"
         xmlns:uap="http://schemas.microsoft.com/appx/manifest/uap/windows10">
    <Identity Name="YOUR-APP-GUID "
              Publisher="CN=YOUR COMPANY"
              Version="1.x.x.x" />
</Package>
```

You can check which APIs need a packaged application identity by inspecting if
the type that contains the API is marked with the
[DualApiPartition](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.Foundation.Metadata.DualApiPartitionAttribute)
attribute. If it is, you can call if from an unpackaged traditional desktop app.

> If not present, you must convert your classic desktop app to a UWP with the help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, you must convert your classic desktop app to a UWP with the help
```

of a packaging project.

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/desktop/apiindex/uwp-apis-callable-from-a-classic-desktop-app>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/desktop/apiindex/uwp-apis-callable-from-a-classic-desktop-app>
```

#### Benefits of packaging

Besides giving you access to these APIs, you get some additional benefits by
creating a Windows App package for your desktop application including:

* **Streamlined deployment**. Apps have a great deployment experience ensuring
  that users can confidently install an application and update it. If a user

>   chooses to uninstall the app, it is removed completely with no trace left

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  chooses to uninstall the app, it's removed completely with no trace left
```

  Automatic update is a highly reliable and efficient mechanism, because only
  the changed parts of files are downloaded.

* **Increased reach and simplified monetization**. Maybe not your case but if
  you choose to distribute your application through the Microsoft Store you
  reach millions of Windows 10 users.

* **Add UWP features**. You can add UWP features to your app's package at your
  own pace.

#### Prepare for packaging

Before proceeding to package your desktop application, there are some points you
have to address before starting the process. Your application must respect any
of the Microsoft Store rules and policies and run in the UWP application model.
For example, it has to run on the .NET Framework 4.6.2 or later and writes to
the `HKEY_CURRENT_USER` registry hive and the AppData folders will be virtualized
to a user-specific app-local location.

The design goal for packaging is to separate the application state from system
state while maintaining compatibility with other apps. Windows 10 accomplishes
this by placing the application inside a Universal Windows Platform (UWP)
package. It detects and redirects some changes to the file system and registry

> at runtime to fulfill the promise of a trusted and clean install and uninstall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at run time to fulfill the promise of a trusted and clean install and uninstall
```

behavior of an application provided by packaging.

Packages that you create for your desktop application are desktop-only,

> full-trust applications and aren't sandboxed, although there is lightweight

Reviewer: ```suggestion
full-trust applications that aren't sandboxed, although there's lightweight
```

> virtualization applied to the app for writes to `HKCU` & `AppData`. This allows

Reviewer: Probably replace & with and and classify what HKCU and AppData is

them to interact with other apps the same way classic desktop applications do.

##### Installation

App packages are installed under `C:\\Program Files\\WindowsApps\\package_name`,
with the executable titled `app_name.exe`. Each package folder contains a
manifest (named `AppxManifest.xml`) that contains a special XML namespace for
packaged apps. Inside that manifest file is an `<EntryPoint>` element, which

> references the full-trust app. When that application is launched, it does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
references the full-trust app. When that application is launched, it doesn't
```

run inside an app container, but instead it runs as the user as it normally
would.

After deployment, package files are marked read-only and heavily locked down by
the operating system. Windows prevents apps from launching if these files are
tampered with.

##### File system

The OS supports different levels of file system operations for packaged desktop
applications, depending on the folder location.

> When trying to access the user's AppData folder the system creates a private

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When trying to access the user's *AppData* folder, the system creates a private
```

per-user, per-app location behind the scenes. This creates the illusion that the

> packaged application is editing the real AppData when it is actually modifying a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packaged application is editing the real *AppData* when it's actually modifying a
```

private copy. By redirecting writes this way, the system can track all file
modifications made by the app. It can then clean all those files when
uninstalling reducing system "rot" and providing a better application removal
experience for the user.

`##### Registry`

App packages contain a registry.dat file, which serves as the logical equivalent
of `HKLM\Software` in the real registry. At runtime, this virtual registry
merges the contents of this hive into the native system hive to provide a
singular view of both.

All writes are kept during package upgrade and only deleted when the application
is uninstalled.

##### Uninstallation

When the user uninstalls a package, all files and folders located
under `C:\Program Files\WindowsApps\package_name` are removed, as well as any
redirected writes to AppData or the registry that were captured during the
process.

For details about how a packaged application handles installation, file access,

> registry, and uninstallation read

Reviewer: ```suggestion
registry, and uninstallation, see
```

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/msix/desktop/desktop-to-uwp-behind-the-scenes>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/msix/desktop/desktop-to-uwp-behind-the-scenes>.
```

You can get a complete list of things to check on

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/msix/desktop/desktop-to-uwp-prepare>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/msix/desktop/desktop-to-uwp-prepare>.
```

## How to add WinRT APIs to your desktop project

In this section, you can find a walkthrough about how to integrate Toast

> Notifications on an existing WPF application. Although it is simple from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notifications on an existing WPF application. Although it's simple from the
```

code perspective, it helps illustrate the whole process. Notifications are one
of the many available WinRT APIs available that you can use in .NET app. In this
case, the API requires a Package Identity. This process is more straightforward
if the APIs don't require Package Identity.

Let's take an existing WPF sample app that reads files and shows its contents on

> the screen. The goal will be to display a Toast Notification when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the screen. The goal is to display a Toast Notification when the
```

application starts.

> ![Sample application](media\windows-migration\sample-application.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of the sample application running](media\windows-migration\sample-application.png)
```

> First, you should check in the below link whether the Windows 10 API that you
> will use requires a Package Identity:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you should check in the following link whether the Windows 10 API that
you'll use requires a Package Identity:
```

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/desktop-to-uwp-supported-api>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/desktop-to-uwp-supported-api>
```

> Our sample will use the Windows.UI.Notifications API that requires a packaged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our sample will use the <xref:Windows.UI.Notifications.Notification> API that requires a packaged
```

identity:

![Notification class in Microsoft documentation](media\windows-migration\notification-class-documentation.png)

> To enable access to the Windows Runtime API, you just need to add a reference to
> the Microsoft.Windows.SDK.Contracts NuGet package and this will do the magic
> behind the scenes (see details in this link:
> <https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2019/04/30/calling-windows-10-apis-from-a-desktop-application-just-got-easier/\#OQKKZIOZu4p7lC0q.97>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access the WinRT API, add a reference to
the `Microsoft.Windows.SDK.Contracts` NuGet package and this package will do the magic
behind the scenes (see details at
<https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2019/04/30/calling-windows-10-apis-from-a-desktop-application-just-got-easier/>).
```

> You are now prepared to start adding some code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You're now prepared to start adding some code.
```

> Create a ShowToastNotification method that will be called on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `ShowToastNotification` method that will be called on
```

application startup. It just builds a toast notification from an XML pattern:

```csharp
private void ShowNotification(string title, string content, string image)
{
    string xmlString = $@"<toast><visual><binding template = 'ToastGeneric'><text>{title}</text><text>{content}</text><image src=>'{image}'</image></binding></visual></toast>";
    XmlDocument toastXml = new XmlDocument();
    toastXml.LoadXml(xmlString);
    ToastNotification toast = new ToastNotification(toastXml);
    ToastNotificationManager.CreateToastNotifier().Show(toast);
}
```

Although the project builds, there are errors because the Notifications API

> requires a Package Identity, and we didn't provide it. Adding a Windows
> Packaging Project in the Solution will fix it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requires a Package Identity and you didn't provide it. Adding a Windows
Packaging Project to the solution will fix the issue:
```

> ![Adding a Windows Packaging Project](media\windows-migration\adding-packaging-project.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of the Add New Project dialog in Visual Studio](media\windows-migration\adding-packaging-project.png)
```

> 

Reviewer: If the selections made on the dialog are important, it would be good to describe them in the text. also review alt text for the images on the article to make sure they're descriptive enough.

> 

Reviewer: don't use ing for the file names. so instead of adding, add. same for the next image, instead of selecting, select, etc. lots of images on this PR with the same problem.

> Select the minimum Windows version you want to support and the
> version you are targeting. Not all the WinRT APIs are supported in all Windows
> 10 versions. Each Windows 10 update adds new APIs that are only available from
> this version; down-level support is not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select the minimum Windows version you want to support and the
version you're targeting. Not all the WinRT APIs are supported in all Windows
10 versions. Each Windows 10 update adds new APIs that are only available from
this version; down-level support isn't available.
```

![Selecting versions](media\windows-migration\selecting-versions.png)

> 

Reviewer: Are the versions selected on this image important for the user reading? if so, make sure they're covered in text as well.

Next step is to add the WPF application to the Windows Packaging Project by
adding a project reference:

![Adding WPF application to the Windows Packaging Project](media\windows-migration\adding-application.png)

![Reference Manager](media\windows-migration\reference-manager.png)

A Windows Packaging Project can package several apps so you should set which one
is the Entry Point:

![Setting entry point](media\windows-migration\setting-entry-point.png)

Next step is to set the WPF Project as the startup Project in the solution
configuration. You can press F5 to compile and build and see the results.

> ![Result](media\windows-migration\result.png)

Reviewer: file names should also have hyphen and be longer

Let's generate the package so you can install your app. Right click on *Store \>
Create App Packages*

![Create App Packages](media\windows-migration\create-app-packages.png)

Select the sideloading option to deploy the app from your machine:

![Selecting sideloading option](media\windows-migration\selecting-sideloading-option.png)

Select the application architecture of your app:

![Selecting the application architecture](media\windows-migration\selecting-app-architecture.png)

> Finally, create the package clicking on **Create.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, create the package by clicking on **Create**.
```

XAML inside of your app using XAML Islands.

Windows 10 1903 update introduces a set of APIs that allows hosting UWP XAML
content in Win32 windows. Only apps running on Windows 10 1903 can use XAML
Islands.

### The road to XAML Islands

The road to XAML Islands started in 2012 when Microsoft introduced the WinRT
APIs as a framework to modernize the Win32 apps (Windows Forms, WPF, and native
Win32 apps). However, the new UI controls inside WinRT were available for new
applications but not for existing ones.

In 2015, along with Windows 10, UWP was born. The Universal Windows Platform
(UWP) allows you to create apps that work across Windows devices like XBox,
Mobile, and Desktop. One year later, Microsoft announced Desktop Bridge
(formerly known as Project Centennial). Desktop Bridge is a set of tools that
allowed developers to bring their existing Win32 apps to the Microsoft Store.
More capabilities were added in 2017, allowing developers to enhance their Win32
apps leveraging some of the new Windows 10 APIs, like live tiles and
notifications on the action center. But still, no new UI controls.

At Build 2018, Microsoft announced a way for developers to use the new Windows

> 10 XAML controls into their current win32 apps, without fully migrating their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10 XAML controls into their current Win32 apps, without fully migrating their
```

Hosting Controls

##### Wrapped Controls

These wrapped controls wrap some UWP controls into Windows Forms or WPF
controls, hiding UWP concepts for those developers. These controls are:

* WebView and WebViewCompatible
* InkCanvas and InkToolbar
* MediaPlayerElement
* MapControl

Add the `Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.Controls` package to your project, include the
reference to the namespace and start using them.

```xml
<Window
        ...
        xmlns:uwpControls="clr-namespace:Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.Controls;assembly=Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.Controls">
<Grid>
    <Grid.RowDefinitions>
        <RowDefinition Height="Auto"/>
        <RowDefinition Height="\*"/>
    </Grid.RowDefinitions>
    <uwpControls:InkToolbar TargetInkCanvas="{x:Reference Name=inkCanvas}"/>
    <uwpControls:InkCanvas Grid.Row="1" x:Name="inkCanvas" />
</Grid>
```

##### Hosting Controls

The power of XAML Islands extends to the majority of inbox controls, third party
controls, and custom control develop for UWP that can be integrated into Windows
Forms and WPF as an "Island" of fully functional UI. The `WindowsXamlHost` control
for WPF and Windows Forms allows doing this.

> For example, to use the `WindowsXamlHost` control in WPF, you just need to add

Reviewer: I'd probably remove these "you just need from the next sentences..."

```suggestion
For example, to use the `WindowsXamlHost` control in WPF, add a reference to
```

the `Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.XamlHost` package provided by Windows Community
Toolkit.

> Once you have placed your `WindowsXamlHost` into your UI code, you just need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've placed your `WindowsXamlHost` into your UI code,
```

> specify which UWP type you want to load and you can choose to use a wrapped
> control like a Button or a more complex one composed by several different
> controls, that are a custom UWP control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specify which UWP type you want to load. You can choose to use a wrapped
control like a `Button` or a more complex one composed by several different
controls, which are a custom UWP control.
```

> Here is a sample code snippet that shows how to add a UWP Button:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to add a UWP `Button`:
```

```xml
<Window
        ...
        xmlns:xamlhost="clr-namespace:Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.XamlHost;assembly=Microsoft.Toolkit.Wpf.UI.XamlHost">

<xamlhost:WindowsXamlHost x:Name="myUwpButton"
                          InitialTypeName="Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.Button" />
```

> There is a clear recommendation on how to approach this and is better to have

Reviewer: it's not clear what approach this means here...

> There is a clear recommendation on how to approach this and is better to have
> one single and bigger XAML Island containing a custom composite control than to
> have several islands with one control on each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a clear recommendation on how to approach this and it's better to have
one single and bigger XAML Island containing a custom composite control than to
have several islands with one control on each.
```

> One of the core features of XAML is binding and it works between your Win32 code
> and the island so you can bind, for instance, a Win32 Textbox with a UWP
> Textbox. One important thing to consider is that these bindings are one-way
> bindings, from UWP to Win32, so if you update the Textbox inside the XAML Island
> the Win32 Textbox will be updated, but not the other way around.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the core features of XAML is binding and it works between your Win32 code
and the island. So, you can bind, for instance, a Win32 `Textbox` with a UWP
`Textbox`. One important thing to consider is that these bindings are one-way
bindings, from UWP to Win32, so if you update the `Textbox` inside the XAML Island
the Win32 Textbox will be updated, but not the other way around.
```

> This link contains a walkthrough about how to use XAML Islands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see a walkthrough about how to use XAML Islands, see:
```

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/host-standard-control-with-xaml-islands>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/host-standard-control-with-xaml-islands>
```

#### Adding UWP XAML custom controls

> A XAML custom control is a control (or user control) created by you or by third

Reviewer: third parties is weird. Usually third-party is an adjective like third-party companies, vendors, etc.

> parties (including WinUI 2.x controls). To host a custom UWP control in a
> Windows Forms or WPF app, you'll need to use the `WindowsXamlHost` in your .NET
> Core 3 app. Besides that, is required, at least, to create a UWP app project
> that defines a `XamlApplication` object.

Reviewer: This paragraph was a bit hard to read. is this still correct like this?

```suggestion
parties (including WinUI 2.x controls). To host a custom UWP control in a
Windows Forms or WPF app, you'll need:

- To use the `WindowsXamlHost` UWP control in your .NET Core 3.x app. 
- To create a UWP app project that defines a `XamlApplication` object.
```

> Your WPF (or Windows Forms) project must have access to an instance of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your WPF or Windows Forms project must have access to an instance of the
```

`Microsoft.Toolkit.Win32.UI.XamlHost.XamlApplication` class provided by the
Windows Community Toolkit. This object acts as a root metadata provider for
loading metadata for custom UWP XAML types in assemblies in the current
directory of your application. The recommended way to do this is to add a Blank

> App (Universal Windows) project to the same solution as your WPF (or Windows
> Forms) project and revise the default App class in this project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App (Universal Windows) project to the same solution as your WPF or Windows
Forms project and revise the default App class in this project.
```

The custom UWP XAML control can be included on this UWP app or in an independent
UWP Class Library project that you reference in the same solution as your WPF

> (or Windows Forms) project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or Windows Forms project.
```

> You can check a details step-by-step process description here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check a detailed step-by-step process description at:
```

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/host-custom-control-with-xaml-islands>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/host-custom-control-with-xaml-islands>
```

> #### The Windows UI Library (WinUI 2)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The Windows UI Library (WinUI 2)
```

Besides the inbox Windows 10 controls that comes with the OS, the same UWP XAML
team also deliver additional controls in the Windows UI Library (**WinUI 2**).
WinUI 2 provides official native Microsoft UI controls and features for Windows
UWP apps and these controls can be used inside of XAML Islands.

> WinUI 2 is open source and you can find information at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WinUI 2 is open source and you can find information at
```

> <https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml>.
```

The following article demonstrates how to host a UWP XAML control from the WinUI
2 library:

> <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/host-custom-control-with-xaml-islands>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/host-custom-control-with-xaml-islands>
```

### Do you need XAML Islands?

> XAML Islands are intended for existing Win32 Apps that wants to improve their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XAML Islands are intended for existing Win32 apps that want to improve their
```

user experience by leveraging new UWP controls and behaviors without a full

> rewrite of the App. You could already [leverage Windows 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rewrite of the app. You could already [leverage Windows 10
```

> APIs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/porting/desktop-to-uwp-enhance),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APIs](/windows/uwp/porting/desktop-to-uwp-enhance),
```

but up until XAML Islands, only non-UI related APIs.

> If you are developing a new Windows App, a [UWP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're developing a new Windows App, a [UWP
```

> App](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/get-started/universal-application-platform-guide) is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App](/windows/uwp/get-started/universal-application-platform-guide) is
```

probably the right approach.

### The road ahead XAML Islands: WinUI 3.0

Since Windows 8, the Windows UI platform, including the XAML
UI framework, visual composition layer, and input processing has been shipped as
an integral part of Windows. This means that to benefit from the latest

> improvements on UI technologies you must upgrade to the latest version of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
improvements on UI technologies, you must upgrade to the latest version of the
```

UI, slowing down the pace of innovation when you develop your apps. To decouple
these two evolution cycles and foster innovation, Microsoft is actively working
on the WinUI project.

> Starting with WinUI 2 in 2018, Microsoft start shipping some new XAML UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with WinUI 2 in 2018, Microsoft started shipping some new XAML UI
```

controls and features as separate NuGet packages that build on top of the UWP
SDK.

![WinUI 2.0](media\windows-migration\winui2.png)

WinUI 3 is under active development and will greatly expand the scope of WinUI

> to include the full UI platform, which will now be fully decoupled from the UWP

Reviewer: either is now or will be

```suggestion
to include the full UI platform, which will be fully decoupled from the UWP
```

SDK:

> ![WinUI 3.0](media\windows-migration\image36.png)

Reviewer: wrong image name here

XAML framework will now be developed on GitHub and shipped out

> of band as [NuGet](https://docs.microsoft.com/nuget/what-is-nuget) packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of band as [NuGet](/nuget/what-is-nuget) packages.
```

The existing UWP XAML APIs that ship as part of the OS will no longer receive
new feature updates. They will still receive security updates and critical fixes
according to the Windows 10 support lifecycle.

> The Universal Windows Platform contains more than just the XAML framework (e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Universal Windows Platform contains more than just the XAML framework (for example,
```

application and security model, media pipeline, Xbox and Windows 10 shell
integrations, broad device support) and will continue to evolve. All new XAML
features will just be developed and ship as part of WinUI instead.

#### WinUI 3 in desktop app and WinUI XAML Islands

As you can see, WinUI 3 is the evolution of UWP XAML and it works naturally
within the UWP app model and all its requirements (MSIX packaged ID, sandbox,
CoreWindow, etc). To use just WinUI 3 in a Win32 app model, the WinUI content
should be hosted by another UI Framework (Windows Forms, WPF, etc.) using **WinUI
XAML Islands**. This is the right path if you want to evolve your app and mix
technologies. However, if you want to replace your entire old UI for WinUI, your
app shouldn't load UI Frameworks for just hosting WinUI.

WinUI 3 will address this critical feedback adding **WinUI in desktop apps**.
This will allow that Win32 apps can use WinUI 3 as standalone UI Framework; no
need to load Windows Forms or WPF.

Within this aggregation, WinUI 3 will let developers easily mix and match the
right combination of:

* App model: UWP, Win32

> * Platform: .NET Core 3 or Native

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Platform: .NET Core or Native
```

* Language: .NET (C\#, Visual Basic), standard C++
* Packaging: MSIX, AppX for the Microsoft Store, unpackaged

> * Interop: use WinUI 3 to extend existing WPF, WinForms and MFC apps using WinUI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Interop: use WinUI 3 to extend existing WPF, WinForms, and MFC apps using WinUI
```

  XAML Islands.

If you want to know more details, Microsoft is sharing this roadmap in

> <https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml>.

Reviewer: should it link to https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml/blob/master/docs/roadmap.md?
